# Founder sets under allelic and non-allelic homologous recombination

Analysis of the set of founder sequences under a homologous recombination model.

Please refer to the preprint on biorXiv: [https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2022.05.27.493721v1](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2022.05.27.493721v1).


## Requirements
### Main programs
* `rust` version >= 1.60
* `gurobi` version >= 9.5 or `cplex`
### Workflow (optional)
* `python` version >= 3.7
* `snakemake`

## Build software

```
cargo build --manifest-path Cargo.toml --release
```

## Run examples

Example with 4 available CPU cores.

### Simulation experiments

```
cd examples/experiments/sim
snakemake -j 4
```

### Example from paper

```
cd examples/experiments/examples
snakemake -k -j 4
```

### Clean up

Use the `clean` snakemake target:

```
snakemake -k -j 1 clean
```


## Usage

The following uses the `examples' experiment as reference.  It demonstrates the
software's typical usage with the provided `snakemake` workflows.

### Configuration

Experiments reside in their own respective directories and are configured via a `config.yaml` file, used to configure simulation and analysis parameters.
Paths should be left as-is unless changing directory structure.
Remaining recognized parameters:

- `debug` (boolean): toggles verbose debugging output
- `xhap_regex` (string): regular expression used to select haplotype paths in the input GFA files
- `solve_time_limit` (integer, minutes): time limit for the `gurobi` optimization steps
- `nnodes` (integer list): number of nodes in the graph
- `dup_ratio` (list of floats ∈ [0;1]): duplications ratio
- `inv_ratio` (list of floats ∈ [0;1]): inversions among duplications ratio
- `nhaplotypes` (integer): number of haplotypes to generate
- `nsamples` (integer): number of replicates per parameter set

Data used by the experiment should reside in a subdirectory under `examples/data`.


### Programs

- `hapsim`: generate simulated founder set, haplotypes, and their variation graph
- `subgr`: select subset of haplotypes and resulting subgraph from a GFA file
- `mkflow`: write to file flow linear program to solve
- `flow2seq`: reconstruct founder set sequences from flow solution
- `min_random`: estimate number of recombinations in flow solution by random assignment trials
- `mkmin`: write to file minimization program to solve
- `min2seq`: reconstruct founder set sequences from minimization solution


### Output

Most relevant output, by file extension:

- `.gfa`: user-provided GFA, or one generated by the simulator
- `.lp`, `.sol`: linear program and solution of flow program and recombination minimization
- `.nrecomb.txt`: number of recombinations in flow solution after random assignment trials
- `.flow.founders.txt`: minimal founder sequences set reconstructed from flow solution
- `.min.founders.txt`: minimal founder sequences set after minimizing their number of recombinations

In the results, founder sequences are represented horizontally in GFA format walk lines.
Minimization output shows two additional lines per founder sequence to indicate
the positions of a recombination, and the haplotype a segment above belongs to.


## License

This software is distributed under the MIT license.  For more details, see the
LICENSE file.
